Author: Jeng-Ru Wu
Netid: jwu532

<P5A>
I developed a file system checker for xv6. It checks for the following rules:

1. Each inode is either unallocated or one of the valid types (T_FILE, T_DIR, T_DEV). ERROR: bad inode.
2. For in-use inodes, each address that is used by inode is valid (points to a valid datablock address within the image). If the direct block is used and is invalid, print ERROR: bad direct address in inode.; if the indirect block is in use and is invalid, print ERROR: bad indirect address in inode.
3. Root directory exists, its inode number is 1, and the parent of the root directory is itself. ERROR: root directory does not exist.
4. Each directory contains . and .. entries, and the . entry points to the directory itself. ERROR: directory not properly formatted.
5. For in-use inodes, each address in use is also marked in use in the bitmap. ERROR: address used by inode but marked free in bitmap.
6. For blocks marked in-use in bitmap, actually is in-use in an inode or indirect block somewhere. ERROR: bitmap marks block in use but it is not in use.
7. For in-use inodes, direct address in use is only used once. ERROR: direct address used more than once.
8. For in-use inodes, indirect address in use is only used once. ERROR: indirect address used more than once.
9. For all inodes marked in use, must be referred to in at least one directory. ERROR: inode marked use but not found in a directory.
10. For each inode number that is referred to in a valid directory, it is actually marked in use. ERROR: inode referred to in directory but marked free.
11. Reference counts (number of links) for regular files match the number of times file is referred to in directories (i.e., hard links work correctly). ERROR: bad reference count for file.
12. No extra links allowed for directories (each directory only appears in one other directory). ERROR: directory appears more than once in file system.
13. Each .. entry in the directory refers to the proper parent inode, and parent inode points back to it. ERROR: parent directory mismatch.
14. Every directory traces back to the root directory. (i.e. no loops in the directory tree.) ERROR: inaccessible directory exists.
