Project 5A: File System Checker
Background
In this assignment, you will be developing a working file system checker. A checker reads in a file system image and makes sure that it is consistent. When it isn't, the checker takes steps to repair the problems it sees; however, you won't be doing any repairs to keep your life at the end of the semester a little simpler.

A Basic Checker
For this project, you will use the xv6 file system image as the basic image that you will be reading and checking. The file include/fs.h includes the basic structures you need to understand, including the superblock, on disk inode format (struct dinode), and directory entry format (struct dirent). The tool tools/mkfs.c will also be useful to look at, in order to see how an empty file-system image is created.

Much of this project will be puzzling out the exact on-disk format xv6 uses for its simple file system, and then writing checks to see if various parts of that structure are consistent. Thus, reading through mkfs and the file system code itself will help you understand how xv6 uses the bits in the image to record persistent information.

Your checker should read through the file system image and determine the consistency of a number of things, including the following. When one of these does not hold, print the error message (also shown below) and exit immediately.

Each inode is either unallocated or one of the valid types (T_FILE, T_DIR, T_DEV). ERROR: bad inode.
For in-use inodes, each address that is used by inode is valid (points to a valid datablock address within the image). If the direct block is used and is invalid, print ERROR: bad direct address in inode.; if the indirect block is in use and is invalid, print ERROR: bad indirect address in inode.
Root directory exists, its inode number is 1, and the parent of the root directory is itself. ERROR: root directory does not exist.
Each directory contains . and .. entries, and the . entry points to the directory itself. ERROR: directory not properly formatted.
For in-use inodes, each address in use is also marked in use in the bitmap. ERROR: address used by inode but marked free in bitmap.
For blocks marked in-use in bitmap, actually is in-use in an inode or indirect block somewhere. ERROR: bitmap marks block in use but it is not in use.
For in-use inodes, direct address in use is only used once. ERROR: direct address used more than once.
For in-use inodes, indirect address in use is only used once. ERROR: indirect address used more than once.
For all inodes marked in use, must be referred to in at least one directory. ERROR: inode marked use but not found in a directory.
For each inode number that is referred to in a valid directory, it is actually marked in use. ERROR: inode referred to in directory but marked free.
Reference counts (number of links) for regular files match the number of times file is referred to in directories (i.e., hard links work correctly). ERROR: bad reference count for file.
No extra links allowed for directories (each directory only appears in one other directory). ERROR: directory appears more than once in file system.
Other Specifications
Your checker program must be invoked exactly as follows:

$ xv6_fsck file_system_image
The image file is a file that contains the file system image. If no image file is provided, you should print the error Usage: xv6_fsck <file_system_image>. to stderr and exit with the error code of 1. If the file system image does not exist, you should print the error image not found. to stderr and exit with the error code of 1. If the checker detects one of the errors listed above, it should print the proper error to stderr and exit with error code 1. Otherwise, the checker should exit with return code of 0.

Extra Credits
For this project, you can gain some extra points (up to 8 points more on top of the 40) by implementing the following more challenging condition checks:

Each .. entry in the directory refers to the proper parent inode, and parent inode points back to it. ERROR: parent directory mismatch.
Every directory traces back to the root directory. (i.e. no loops in the directory tree.) ERROR: inaccessible directory exists.
Another way to earn more extra points is to actually repair the "inode marked use but not found in a directory" error. We will provide you with a xv6 image that has a number of in-use inodes that are not linked by any directory. An example of such an image is available at ~cs537-10/ta/tests/p5a/images/Repair. Your job is to collect these nodes and put them into the lost_found directory (which is already in the provided image under the root directory).

By doing so, your will need to obtain the write access to the file system image in order to modify it. This repair operation of your checker program should only be performed when -r flag is specified:

$ xv6_fsck -r image_to_be_repaired
In this repair mode, your program should not exit when an error is encountered. You can also assume there is no other types of error in the provided image. It should exit only after it has created an entry under the lost_found directory for every lost inodes.

Hints
It may be worth looking into using mmap() for the project.

It should be very helpful to read chapter 6 of the xv6 book here (Links to an external site.). Note that the version of xv6 we're using does not include the logging feature described in the book; you can safely ignore the parts that pertain to that. OSTEP also has a helpful chapterLinks to an external site..

Make sure to look at fs.img , which is a file system image created when you make xv6 by the tool mkfs (found in the tools/ directory of xv6). The output of this tool is the file fs.img and it is a consistent file-system image. The tests, of course, will put inconsistencies into this image, but your tool should work over a consistent image as well. Study mkfs and its output to begin to make progress on this project.

Drop Policy
You could drop one project part during the final grade calculation. However, for p5, since we have only one 40-point part (instead of two 20 points parts in other projects), we divide p5 into two logical dropable "parts": requirements 1-6 in "A Basic Checker" + mismatch + loop is part 1 and requirements 7-12 + repair is part 2. During the grading, these two parts would have individual grades.

More specifically, part 1 includes these test cases (50 points + 10 points extra):

- Badroot, Badinode, Badaddr, Badindir1, Badindir2, Badroot2, Badfmt, Mrkfree, Mrkfreeindir, Mrkused, [Extra: Mismatch, Loop]

part 2 includes these test cases (50 points + 10 points extra):

- Good, Goodrefcnt, Nonexistant, Addronce, Imrkused, Imrkfree, Badrefcnt, Dironce, Goodrm, Goodrm2, Goodlink, Goodlarge, [Extra: Repair, Repair2]